content/posts/listen_first_code_later.md, before:

---
title: "Listen First, Code Later: A Software Engineer's Guide to Avoiding Wasted Work"
date: 2024-11-26T23:31:33+02:00
draft: false
tags:
    - organization
    - developer
    - communication
    - teams
---

# Listen First, Code Later: A Software Engineer's Guide to Avoiding Wasted Work

Several years into my software engineering career, I made a surprising discovery: my job doesn't start with code—it starts with communication and listening. Like many engineers, I joined this industry because I love building things. The excitement of creating solutions and fixing problems still drives me today. However, this builder's mindset comes with a hidden trap: we often prioritize speaking over listening.

## The Communication Paradox in Software Engineering

As software engineers, our primary goal is solving problems. But how can we solve problems if we don't fully understand them first? This is where many of us stumble. We're so eager to propose solutions that we sometimes forget to properly understand the problem we're trying to solve.

I've witnessed this pattern repeatedly across multiple companies: engineers jumping straight into solution mode before fully grasping the problem at hand. The consequences? Weeks or months of work that might need to be completely redone or extensively modified because we solved the wrong problem.

## Why Understanding Problems Is Harder Than It Seems

You might think, "Surely most problems are straightforward enough?" This is where we encounter a fundamental challenge of human communication. Unlike Vulcans from Star Trek, we can't mind-meld. We rely on speaking and writing—inherently imperfect methods of conveying complex ideas.

Consider the ancient parable of blind men examining an elephant: one touches the trunk and describes a flexible, boneless creature; another feels the leg and describes a sturdy, column-like being; a third touches the tail and describes something entirely different. Each person is correct about their particular experience, but none has the complete picture.

Similarly, when discussing software problems, we all bring our own biases and experiences to the conversation. What seems obvious to one person might mean something entirely different to another.

## Practical Steps for Better Problem Understanding

1. **Prioritize Understanding Over Solutions**
   When someone brings you a problem, resist the immediate urge to propose solutions. Instead, focus entirely on understanding the problem first.

2. **Master the Art of Asking Questions**
   - "Let me repeat back what I understood about this problem..."
   - "What other use cases should we consider?"
   - "Could you walk me through the user flow?"
   - "Would you mind showing me exactly where users encounter this issue?"

3. **Focus on User Stories, Not Technical Solutions**
   When documenting problems, center your writing around user scenarios and journeys rather than technical specifications. Describe what users experience, when they experience it, and why it's problematic.

## Improving Your Own Communication

When communicating problems to others, avoid writing lengthy technical manifestos. Instead:
- Focus on concrete user scenarios
- Describe the complete user journey
- Highlight specific pain points in the user experience
- Keep personal opinions separate from user needs

Remember: every time we communicate, we filter information through our own biases. The key is to minimize these filters by focusing on observable user behaviors and experiences rather than our interpretations of them.

## Conclusion

The next time you're faced with a new problem to solve, take a step back. Remember that your first job isn't to write code—it's to listen and understand. The time invested in proper problem understanding will save you countless hours of potentially wasted work later.

By mastering the art of listening and questioning, we can become not just better engineers, but better problem solvers. After all, the best solution to the wrong problem is still the wrong solution.

Commit message:

New theme + fix posts with the new theme

content/posts/listen_first_code_later.md, after:

---
title: "Listen First, Code Later: A Software Engineer's Guide to Avoiding Wasted Work"
date: 2024-11-26T23:31:33+02:00
draft: false
tags:
    - organization
    - developer
    - communication
    - teams
---

Several years into my software engineering career, I made a surprising discovery: my job doesn't start with code—it starts with communication and listening. Like many engineers, I joined this industry because I love building things. The excitement of creating solutions and fixing problems still drives me today. However, this builder's mindset comes with a hidden trap: we often prioritize speaking over listening.

## The Communication Paradox in Software Engineering

As software engineers, our primary goal is solving problems. But how can we solve problems if we don't fully understand them first? This is where many of us stumble. We're so eager to propose solutions that we sometimes forget to properly understand the problem we're trying to solve.

I've witnessed this pattern repeatedly across multiple companies: engineers jumping straight into solution mode before fully grasping the problem at hand. The consequences? Weeks or months of work that might need to be completely redone or extensively modified because we solved the wrong problem.

## Why Understanding Problems Is Harder Than It Seems

You might think, "Surely most problems are straightforward enough?" This is where we encounter a fundamental challenge of human communication. Unlike Vulcans from Star Trek, we can't mind-meld. We rely on speaking and writing—inherently imperfect methods of conveying complex ideas.

Consider the ancient parable of blind men examining an elephant: one touches the trunk and describes a flexible, boneless creature; another feels the leg and describes a sturdy, column-like being; a third touches the tail and describes something entirely different. Each person is correct about their particular experience, but none has the complete picture.

Similarly, when discussing software problems, we all bring our own biases and experiences to the conversation. What seems obvious to one person might mean something entirely different to another.

## Practical Steps for Better Problem Understanding

1. **Prioritize Understanding Over Solutions**
   When someone brings you a problem, resist the immediate urge to propose solutions. Instead, focus entirely on understanding the problem first.

2. **Master the Art of Asking Questions**
   - "Let me repeat back what I understood about this problem..."
   - "What other use cases should we consider?"
   - "Could you walk me through the user flow?"
   - "Would you mind showing me exactly where users encounter this issue?"

3. **Focus on User Stories, Not Technical Solutions**
   When documenting problems, center your writing around user scenarios and journeys rather than technical specifications. Describe what users experience, when they experience it, and why it's problematic.

## Improving Your Own Communication

When communicating problems to others, avoid writing lengthy technical manifestos. Instead:
- Focus on concrete user scenarios
- Describe the complete user journey
- Highlight specific pain points in the user experience
- Keep personal opinions separate from user needs

Remember: every time we communicate, we filter information through our own biases. The key is to minimize these filters by focusing on observable user behaviors and experiences rather than our interpretations of them.

## Conclusion

The next time you're faced with a new problem to solve, take a step back. Remember that your first job isn't to write code—it's to listen and understand. The time invested in proper problem understanding will save you countless hours of potentially wasted work later.

By mastering the art of listening and questioning, we can become not just better engineers, but better problem solvers. After all, the best solution to the wrong problem is still the wrong solution.

## Further Reading  

To deepen your understanding of effective communication in software engineering and problem-solving, here are some valuable resources:

1. **"The Mom Test" by Rob Fitzpatrick**
   A practical guide to talking to customers and learning if your business is a good idea when everyone is lying to you. While focused on entrepreneurship, its techniques for asking good questions and avoiding biased feedback are invaluable for engineers.

2. **"Debugging Teams: Better Productivity through Collaboration" by Brian W. Fitzpatrick and Ben Collins-Sussman**
   Explores how to work effectively in software teams, with excellent chapters on communication and understanding team dynamics.

3. **"Clean Language: Revealing Metaphors and Opening Minds" by Wendy Sullivan and Judy Rees**
   Though not specifically about software engineering, this book provides powerful questioning techniques that help uncover true meaning in conversations.

4. **"Just Enough Requirements Management" by Alan Davis**
   A practical guide to gathering and managing requirements effectively, with specific techniques for better understanding user needs.

5. **"Crucial Conversations: Tools for Talking When Stakes are High" by Kerry Patterson et al.**
   While this is a general communication book, its techniques are particularly valuable for technical discussions and requirement gathering sessions.

6. **"Are Your Lights On?: How to Figure Out What the Problem Really Is" by Donald C. Gause and Gerald M. Weinberg**
   A classic that teaches how to identify the real problem that needs solving, often different from the initially stated problem.
